# Overview
Procedurally generated city simulator written in Lua using [LÖVE 2D](https://github.com/love2d/love) library.

> [!Note]
> The main goal of this project was to gain in-depth knowledge of Lua, procedural generation, and graph algorithms therefore performance and language chosen for the implementation might not be optimal

# Table of Contents
  - [How to Use](#how-to-use)
  - [Implementation Details](#implementation-details)
    - [Code Structure](#code-structure)
    - [Procedural Generation](#procedural-generation)
      - [Base Layer](#base-layer)
      - [Zone Layer](#zone-layer)
      - [Infrastructure Layer](#infrastructure-layer)

# How to Use
1. **Clone this repository**
```shell
git clone https://github.com/rm-a0/city-sim
```
2. **Install dependencies** 
- Install Lua 5.4 and LÖVE 11.5 (or compatible versions)
- On Debian-based systems (e.g., Ubuntu)
```shell
sudo apt install lua5.4 love
```
3. **Run simulator**
```shell
love city-sim/src
```

# Implementation Details
## Code structure
```src/
├── core/
│   ├── city.lua             # Contains the City metatable and methods
│   ├── generator.lua        # Encapsulates procedural generation
├── procedural/
│   ├── noise.lua            # Perlin noise generation for terrain features
│   ├── voronoi.lua          # Voronoi diagram for zoning
│   ├── poisson.lua          # Poisson disk sampling for layout
├── render/
│   ├── draw.lua             # Rendering functions
├── tiles/
│   ├── tileFactory.lua      # Tile creation and logic
│   ├── tile.lua             # Contains the Tile metatable and methods
│   ├── tileTypes/           # Contains different Tile types definitions
├── utils/
│   ├── algorithm.lua        # Contains algorithm module
│   ├── algorithms/          # Contains implementation of different algorithms
├── main.lua
```
## Procedural Generation
The city is generated using several layers of procedural techniques. Each layer adds more detail to the simulation, such as terrain features, zoning, roads, and buildings.

### Base Layer
The first layer is generated using [Perlin Noise](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perlin_noise), which is commonly used for generating terrain, such as landscapes or environmental features.

#### River Generation
After the lakes are generated, create chains of lakes based on distance between them (you can adjust minimum and maximum number of chains in `core/generator.lua`). These chains are then processed through [A* algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A*_search_algorithm) with custom heuristic that makes the path between 2 points look wavy. This was achieved by utilizing sine function with its applitude amplified by distance between the two points and then slightly randomized.

### Zone Layer
Once the base terrain is established, [Voronoi Diagrams](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voronoi_diagram) are used to generate city zones like residential, commercial, and industrial areas. Seeds are generated using [Poisson Disk Sampling](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Poisson_sampling) for more natural and spaced layout. Additionally there is a possibility to set frequency for each zone.

### Infrastructure Layer
#### Roads
- **Main Roads**: Generated by tracing the edges of Voronoi zones, forming the primary road network that outlines each zone.
- **Secondary Roads**: Created similarly to main roads but based on a separate set of abstract zones. These zones use a new seed and a smaller radius for **Poisson Disk Sampling**, producing a finer road network within zones.

#### Buildings
Buildings are placed using **Poisson Disk Sampling** with custom offset and spacing to create a grid-like pattern, ensuring structured yet varied placement within zones.

### Tile and Grid Structure

#### Tiles
Each tile has the following properties:
- **Type**: Defines the tile's role (e.g., road, building, zone).
- **Color**: Used for 2D rendering and visualization.
- **Parent(s)**: Specifies which tiles can or cannot be placed beneath it. Tile cannot be placed on a grid unless the underlying tile does not belong to it's parents. When a tile is placed, it overwrites the underlying tile.

### Grid
The city is represented as a **2D array** of tiles, supporting two rendering modes for visualization:

- **Quad**: Tiles are rendered as squares, forming a traditional grid layout.
- **Hexa**: Tiles are rendered as pointy-top hexagons. Tiles in each row are aligned side-by-side, sharing edges without gaps, with every second row offset horizontally to allow hexagons to nest between tiles in adjacent rows.

> [!Note]
> The procedural generation algorithms (e.g., zone creation, road tracing, building placement) do not account for the hexagonal tile structure. The hexagonal rendering is used solely for visualization to assess whether the city's structure is suitable for later processing in OpenGL.
